GRAPHICAL USER AUTHENTICATION SYSTEM

ABSTRACT
A Graphical User Authentication is a form of authentication that requires the
recall and/or recognition and selection of an image or points in an image,
inputted during the registration stage in a GUI. Authentication systems provide
the security mechanism for protection of services against unwanted access to
resources. A graphical based Authentication system is one promising alternative
of textual passwords. The most common used computer authentication method today
is alphanumeric passwords.This method has been shown to have significant
drawbacks. Users tend to choose memorable passwords, those memorable passwords
are easy for attackers to guess, but strong system-assigned passwords are
difficult for users to remember. By implementing a graphical password,
we can use the very basic human skill. Some experts suggest that images are
more likely to be remembered than words, because our brains dual encode
images, but encode words only once.[1] Today, the most secure form of
authentication is bio-metrically based but the problem with bio-metrics
is that they are very expensive to implement.


CHAPTER ONE

1.0 Glossary:
i. Password: is a secret that is shared by the verifier and the user, they are
simply secrets that are provided by the user upon request by a recipient and are
often stored on a server in an encrypted form so that a penetration of the file
system does not reveal password lists.

ii. Password Hardening: Password hardening is any one of a variety of measures
taken to make it more difficult for an intruder to circumvent the authentication
process. Password hardening may take the form of multifactor authentication, by
adding some component to the username/password combination or maybe policy-based.

iii. Passphrase: A passphrase is a string of characters longer than the usual
password (which is typically from four to 16 characters long) that is used in
creating a digital signature or in an encryption or a decryption of a message.
Passphrases are often up to 100 characters in length.

iv. Shoulder Surfing: This can be said to be the process of an attacker
capturing a user’s password by direct observation (such as looking over one’s
shoulder) or by recording the user’s authentication session.

v. Attacker: This can be anyone who tries to gain access to someone’s account
without the knowledge of the user either with a good or a bad motive.

vi. Tolerance value: It is the value which indicates the degree of closeness to
the actual click point.

vii. Tolerance region: The area around an original click point accepted as
correct since it is unrealistic to expect the user to accurately target an
exact pixel.

viii. Success rate: It is the rate which gives the number of successful trails
for a certain number of trials. The success rates are calculated as the number
of trails completed without errors or restarts.

ix. Keylogger: is either a software or hardware based attack. It results in the
keyboard entries of users getting extracted from the system and forwarded to
the miscreant.

1.1 Background Of The Study:
Computer security systems are very important to protect the services and
information in a particular computer system; they also must consider the human
factors such as ease of use and accessibility. Current secure systems suffer
because they mostly ignore the importance of human factors in security [2].
Traditionally, alphanumeric passwords are used for authentication but they are
perceived to have usability and security predicaments. A password authentication
system should foster strong and less predictable passwords while sustaining
memorability and security. Graphical passwords use pictures instead of texts
and are somewhat motivated by the fact that humans can retain pictures more
easier than a string of characters. Graphical passwords were first described
by Greg Blonder in 1996 and since then numerous researchers have introduced
different graphical password authentication schemes, in Blonder’s description
of the concept an image would appear on the screen, and the user would click
on a few chosen regions of it. If the correct regions were clicked in,
the user would be authenticated. An essential advantage of Graphical passwords
is that they are easier to remember than textual passwords.
The important advantage of Graphical Passwords is that they are easy to recall
compared to alphanumeric passwords. Thus, graphical passwords provide a
mechanism for offering more user-friendly passwords while increasing
the level of security.

1.2 Problem Statement:
Graphical passwords are a whole new method of authentication. Authentication by
alphanumeric texts are ought to be prone to numerous modes of attacks such as
guessing, social engineering, spyware, dictionary attacks, and shoulder surfing.
It can be difficult for a user to keep up with several passwords for several
sites or systems since it is not recommended to use one password. The main
dilemmas graphical passwords tend to solve is that of a user using a weak
password so that they won’t forget it moreover, at times when users are
encouraged to use strong passwords, they tend to use it for several of their
accounts also, users might tend to keep their passwords in files where attackers
can access them. Since it is easier for humans to evoke pictures than text,
graphical passwords tend to enhance security at the same time makes it easier
for the user to use.

1.3 Aims and objectives:
One of the major issues in this modern day is security. The means of
authentication attempts to enhance security but the prevalent means of
"alphanumeric passwords" today are identified to have significant disadvantages.
Attackers now have diverse means of accessing a particular system hence, other
means of authentication are presently becoming rampant. Biometric-based
authentication is perceived to be among the most secure means of authentication
nevertheless, biometric-based authentication is very expensive to use.
Graphical password authentication is cheap, easy to use, offers more security
(than text-based passwords), and also takes into consideration the user factor.
The aim of this report is to evaluate existing implementations.

1.4 Scope of the study:
This paper centers on graphical password authentication and the various forms
commonly used today. It also highlights the advantages graphical passwords have
over text-based passwords and the forms of attack a user can be prone to while
using graphical passwords. This paper does not delve deep into the traditional
form of authentication (text-based) and biometric form of authentication.


1.5 Justification Of Study:
I selected this research topic due to my interest in finding a more secure
and user directed alternative to text-based passwords.

1.6 Limitations Of Study:
The principal limitation of using a graphical password is that they are more
vulnerable to shoulder surfing than conventional text-based passwords.
Attackers can capture a password by directly observing or by recording the
user's authentication session while inputting passwords in public. This is
referred to as shoulder-surfing. Another limitation is that the login process
is hindered when graphical passwords are used besides this can sometimes pester
a user.

CHAPTER TWO

GRAPHICAL PASSWORD TECHNIQUES

Recognition Based Graphical Techniques:
In recognition-based techniques, the user is presented with a set of images,
then they would be required to pass the authentication stage by recognizing and
identifying the Images he or she selected during the registration.
Recognition-based systems generally require the users to memorize a portfolio of
images during password creation, and then to log in, must recognize their images
from among decoys. Humans are naturally exceptional at recognizing images
previously seen, even those viewed very briefly.

  i.Story algorithm:
Story Scheme was proposed in 2004, this scheme categorizes the available
pictures into nine categories namely animals, cars, women, foods, children, men,
objects, natures, and sports. Users have to select their passwords from the
mixed pictures of nine categories in order to make a story easier to remember.

  ii.Triangle algorithm:
Sobrado and Briget introduced an algorithm to overcome the problem of shoulder
surfing attacks named Triangle. This scheme randomly places a set of N objects
(a few hundred or a few thousand) on the screen. Additionally, there is a subset
of K pass objects previously chosen and memorized by the user. The system will
select the placement of N objects randomly in the log-in phase. The system
initially chooses a patch randomly covering half the screen, and then
randomly again places the K password objects in that patch. In the log-in phase,
the user must be able to find the location of three pass-objects and then click
inside the invisible triangle that is possible to create those three objects.
But, for each login this process will be repeated using a Different group of n
objects. The disadvantage of this algorithm is that the log-in phase must use a
minimum of 1000 images in order to resist shoulder surfing attack.
As a result too many objects are displayed, making it harder for the users to
pinpoint the pass-objects while too a few objects makes the password space small
and hence become simpler to predict or hack.


Recall Based Graphical Techniques:
With recall-based techniques, a user is prompted to reproduce something that
they created or selected earlier during the registration stage. Recall-based
graphical authentication systems are occasionally referred to as draw-metric
systems because users recall and propagate a secret drawing. In these systems,
users typically draw their password either on a blank canvas or on a grid which
arguably acts as a mild memory cue. The recall task is a difficult one since
the retrieval is done without memory prompts or cues.

Hybrid schemes:
These may be described as the combination of two or more schemes, i.e the
combination of recognition and recall-based techniques or the combination of
alphanumeric passwords with graphical password schemes. In the process of an
ATM machine transaction, the bank uses a hybrid system. It consolidates
knowledge-based authentication methods with token-based authentication, the
ATM card is the token (something you have) and the PIN required is
knowledge-based.

CHAPTER THREE

Related Works:
Paper_Title: DragPIN:A Secured PINEntry Scheme to Avert Attacks
 A Secured PINEntry Scheme to Avert Attacks
Publisher: Rajarajan Srinivasan
Date published: March 2018
Overview:
In this paper, the researchers proposed and analyzed the design of a new PIN
entry scheme to secure the PIN numbers against keylogging and shoulder surfing
attacks. Two variants of the schemes were created; manual and auto dragging.
The proposed system revolves around a 5 by 10 array filled with characters that
move automatically or manually so the user can tap the spacebar when he wants to
select a character to input for authentication. The user studies carried out on
the implementations of the schemes have demonstrated their high usability and
security. The proposed schemes are designed and tested on computer usage, they
are yet to be tested for their usability on touch screen based mobile phones.

Advantages:
+The proposed system was found to be friendly by the users
+This system was observed to be more resilient to traditional attack methods
like shoulder surfing

Disadvantages:
-The proposed schemes are designed and tested on computer usage, they are yet to
be tested for their usability on touch screen based mobile phones.
-The proposed schemes use characters which does not make use of our natural gift
of retaining shapes and images efficiently.

Paper_Title: Efficient Shoulder Surfing Resistant PIN Authentication Scheme
             Based on Localized Tactile Feedback
Publisher: Wei-Chi Ku, Hao-Jun Xu
Date published: 21-23 June 2019
Overview:
In this paper, the researchers proposed and analyzed the design of a new PIN
entry scheme to secure the PIN numbers against key-logging and shoulder surfing
attacks. They utilized the mechanism of local-ized tactile feedback (LTF) to
improve the efficiency of shoulder-surfing attacks resistant PIN authenti-cation
schemes. This resistant 8-digit PIN authentication scheme”VpointsPES” works as
follows: The user has to register his/her email address as the account ID andan
8-digit PIN, which consists of 8 decimal digits. Next,the user has to select one
of the following three secu-rity+efficiency configurations: Low SA resistance &
High Efficiency, Medium SA resistance & Medium Efficiency, or High SA resistance
& Low Efficiency. The user then feels with 5 fingers on the screen the vibration
pattern and combined with the visual input.The user feels the vibration pattern,
memorizes the corresponding pass-letter, which is determined by the tactile hint
,and then raises his/her fingers off the screen.


Advantages:
+Measures the background noise to adjust feedback
+Very resilient against shoulder surfing attacks

Disadvantages:
-Limited to smart phones with local-ized tactile feedback (LTF).
-Users with some disabilities may find it hard too impossible to use this scheme.
-This scheme can be very tedious to learn and adapt too

Paper_Title: A Graphical PIN Entry System with Shoulder Surfing Resistance
Publisher: Muhammad Salman, Jian Wang, Yang Li
Date published: 19-21 July 2019
Overview:
In this paper the researchers proposed a graphicalPIN based authentication
system. This scheme uses digits{0,1, ...,9}, like most of the PIN based
authentication systems. The length of the PIN code is 4 digits long. They have
assumed that a one-time registration process of this authentica-tion scheme is
performed in a secure location, where no possible attackers, as well as no video
recording device, is present.The proposed scheme consists of four rows with
arrows on the left and right side of each row. There is one “ENTER” and one
“RESET”. Each row has ten columns and each column will be populated with a
random digit from{0,1,...,9}in every authentication session. You can move the
digits in each row on the left and right side with the help of arrows
corresponding to each row. “ENTER” button will be used to enter the PIN code
for verification, once you have selected the required four digit PIN code.

Advantages:
+Much simpler than previous proposed schemes
+Resilient to shoulder surfing attacks
Disadvantages:
-The proposed schemes use characters which does not make use of our natural gift
 of retaining shapes and images efficiently.
-Can be time intensive
-The length of PIN code allows only for 10^4 combinations


References
[1] Cheryl L. Grady, Anthony R. McIntosh, M. Natasha Rajah, and Fergus I. M.
Craik PNAS March 3, 1998 95 (5) 2703-2708;https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.5.2703

[2] Rachna Dhamija and Adrian Perrig, “Deja Vu: A User Study. Using Images for
Authentication” In Proceedings of the 9th USENIX Security Symposium, August 2000

[3] Hong.D, Man.S, Hawes.B and Mathews.M (2003)." A shoulder-surfing
resistant graphical password scheme". International conference on security and
management. Las Vegas.
